CHAPTER XVII.
And all the congregation of the children of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin
after their journeys according to the commandment of the LORD, and pitched in Rephidim, and
there was no water for the people to drink. Wherefore the people did chide with Moses,
and said, Give us water that we may drink. And Moses said unto them, Why chide ye with
me? Wherefore do ye tempt the LORD? And the people thirsted there for water, and the people
murmured against Moses, and said, Wherefore is this that thou hast brought us up out of
Egypt to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst? And Moses cried unto
the LORD, saying, What shall I do unto this people? They be almost ready to stone me.
And the LORD said unto Moses, Go on before the people, and take with thee of the elders
of Israel, and thy rod wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thine hand, and go. Behold,
I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb, and thou shalt smite the rock, and
there shall come water out of it that the people may drink. And Moses did so in the
sight of the elders of Israel. And he called the name of the place Massah and Meribah because
of the chiding of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the LORD, saying,
Is the LORD among us or not? Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel in Rephidim. And Moses
said unto Joshua, Choose us out men, and go out, fight with Amalek. To-morrow I will
stand on the top of the hill with the rod of God in mine hand. So Joshua did as Moses
had said to him and fought with Amalek, and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of
the hill. And it came to pass when Moses held up his hand that Israel prevailed, and when
he let down his hand Amalek prevailed. But Moses' hands were heavy, and they took a stone
and put it under him, and he sat thereon, and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the
one on the one side and the other on the other side, and his hands were steady until the
going down of the sun. And Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge of the
sword. And the LORD said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial and a book, and rehearse
it in the years of Joshua, for I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from under
heaven. And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it Jehovah-Nissai, for he said,
Because the LORD hath sworn that the LORD will have war with Amalek from generation
to generation.
CHAPTER XVIII
When Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses' father-in-law, heard of all that God had done
for Moses and for Israel his people, and that the LORD had brought Israel out of Egypt,
then Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, took Zipporah, Moses' wife, after he had sent her back, and
her two sons, of which the name of the one was Gershom, for he said, I have been an alien
in a strange land. And the name of the other was Eleazar, for the God of my father, said
he, was mine help, and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh.
And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, came with his sons and his wife unto Moses into the
wilderness where he encamped to the mount of God. And he said unto Moses, I, thy father-in-law
Jethro, am come unto thee and thy wife and her two sons with her. And Moses went out
to meet his father-in-law, and did obeisance, and kissed him, and they asked each other
of their welfare, and they came into the tent. And Moses told his father-in-law all that
the Lord had done unto Pharaoh, and to the Egyptians, for Israel's sake, and all the
travails that had come upon them by the way, and how the Lord delivered them. And Jethro
rejoiced for all the goodness which the Lord had done to Israel, whom he had delivered
out of the hand of the Egyptians. And Jethro said, Blessed be the Lord who hath delivered
you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh, who hath delivered
the people from under the hand of the Egyptians. Now I know that the Lord is greater than
all gods, for in the thing wherein they dealt proudly he was above them. And Jethro, Moses's
father-in-law, took a burnt offering and sacrifices for God, and Aaron came and all the elders
of Israel to eat bread with Moses's father-in-law before God. And it came to pass on the morrow
sat to judge the people, and the people stood by Moses from the morning unto the evening.
And when Moses's father-in-law saw all that he did to the people, he said, What is this
thing that thou doest to the people? Why sittest thou thyself alone, and all the people stand
by thee from morning unto even? And Moses said unto his father-in-law, Because the people
come unto me to inquire of God. When they have a matter, they come unto me, and I judge
between one and another, and I do make them know the statutes of God and his laws. And
Moses's father-in-law said unto him, The thing that thou doest is not good. Thou wilt surely
wear away both thou and this people that is with thee, for this thing is too heavy for
thee. Thou art not able to perform it thyself alone. Harken thou unto my voice, I will
give thee counsel, and God shall be with thee. Be thou for the people to Godward, that thou
mayest bring the causes unto God, and thou shalt teach them ordinances and laws, and
shalt show them the way wherein they must walk, and the work that they must do. Moreover
thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth,
hating covetousness, and place such over them to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds,
rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens, and let them judge the people at all seasons,
and it shall be that every great matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter
they shall judge, so shall it be easier for thyself, and they shall bear the burden with
thee. If thou shalt do this thing, and God command thee so, then thou shalt be able
to endure, and all this people shall also go to their place in peace.
So Moses harken to the voice of his father-in-law, and did all that he had said. And Moses chose
the able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands,
rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens, and they judged the people
at all seasons, the hard causes they brought unto Moses, but every small matter they judged
themselves. Then Moses let his father-in-law depart, and he went his way into his own land.
CHAPTER XIX In the third month, when the children of Israel
were gone forth out of the land of Egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness
of Sinai. For they were departed from Rephidim, and were come to the desert of Sinai, and
had pitched in the wilderness, and there Israel camped before the mount. And Moses went up
unto God, and the Lord called unto him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shalt thou say
unto the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel. Ye have seen what I did unto the
Egyptians, and how I bear you on eagle's wings, and brought you unto myself. Now therefore,
if ye will obey my voice and deed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure
unto me above all people, for all the earth is mine. And ye shall be unto me a kingdom
of priests, and an holy nation. These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the
children of Israel. And Moses came and called for the elders of the people, and laid before
their faces all these words which the Lord commanded him. And all the people answered
together and said, All that the Lord hath spoken we will do. And Moses returned the
words of the people unto the Lord. And the Lord said unto Moses, Lo, I come unto thee
in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee forever.
And Moses told the words of the people unto the Lord. And the Lord said unto Moses, Go
unto the people, and sanctify them to-day and to-morrow, and let them wash their clothes,
and be ready against the third day, for the third day the Lord will come down in the sight
of all the people upon Mount Sinai. And thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about,
saying, Take heed to yourselves that ye go not up into the mount, or touch the border
of it. Whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely put to death. There shall not in
hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned or shot through. Whether it be beast or man,
it shall not live. When the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount.
And Moses went down from the mount unto the people, and sanctified the people, and they
washed their clothes. And he said unto the people, Be ready against the third day, come
not at your wives. And it came to pass on the third day and the morning that there were
thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet
exceeding loud, so that all the people that was in the camp trembled. And Moses brought
forth the people out of the camp to meet with God, and they stood at the nether part of
the mount. And Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon
it in fire, and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount
quaked greatly. And when the voice of the trumpet sounded long and waxed louder and
louder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice. And the Lord came down upon Mount
Sinai on the top of the mount, and the Lord called Moses up to the top of the mount, and
Moses went up. And the Lord said unto Moses, Go down, charge the people, lest they break
through unto the Lord to gaze, and many of them perish. And let the priests also, which
come near to the Lord, sanctify themselves, lest the Lord break forth upon them. And Moses
said unto the Lord, The people cannot come up to Mount Sinai, for thou chargeth thus,
set bounds about the mount, and sanctify it. And the Lord said unto him, Away, get thee
down, and thou shalt come up, thou and Aaron with thee, but let not the priests and the
people break through to come up unto the Lord, lest he break forth upon them. So Moses went
down unto the people, and spake unto them.
CHAPTER XX
And God spake all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt have no other gods
before me. Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of anything
that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under
the earth. Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them. For I, the Lord thy
God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of them
that love me, and keep my commandments. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God
in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.
Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six days shalt thou labor, and do all thy
work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. In it thou shalt not do
any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy
stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day. Wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath day, and hallowed it.
Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord
thy God giveth thee. Thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt
not steal, thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor, thou shalt not covet
thy neighbor's house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife, nor his manservant, nor
his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that is thy neighbor's.
And all the people saw the thunderings and the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet
and the mountains spoking, and when the people saw it they removed and stood afar off. And
they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear, but let not God speak with
us lest we die. And Moses said unto the people, Fear not, for God has come to prove you, and
that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin not. And the people stood afar off,
and Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God was.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Thus thou shalt say unto the children of Israel, Ye have
seen that I have talked with you from heaven. Ye shall not make with me gods of silver,
neither shall ye make unto you gods of gold. An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me,
and shalt sacrifice thereon thy burnt offerings, and thy peace offerings, thy sheep, and thine
oxen. In all places where I record my name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.
And if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone, for
if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou hast polluted it. Neither shalt thou go up by steps
unto mine altar, that thy nakedness be not discovered thereon.
CHAPTER XXI Now these are the judgments which thou shalt
set before them. If thou buy in Hebrew servant six years he shall serve, and in the seventh
he shall go out free for nothing. If he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself.
If he were married, then his wife shall go out with him. If his master have given him
a wife, and she have borne him sons or daughters, the wife and her children shall be her masters,
and he shall go out by himself. And if the servant shall plainly say, I love my master,
my wife, and my children, I will not go out free, then his master shall bring him unto
the judges, he shall also bring him to the door or unto the door-post, and his master
shall bore his ear through with an awl, and he shall serve him for ever.
And if a man sell his daughter to be a maid-servant, she shall not go out as the men-servants do.
If she please not her master, who hath betrothed her to himself, then shall he let her be redeemed,
to sell her unto a strange nation, he shall have no power, seeing he hath dealt deceitfully
with her. And if he hath betrothed her unto his son, he shall deal with her after the
manner of daughters. If he take him another wife, her food, her raiment, and her duty
of marriage, shall he not diminish. And if he do not these three unto her, then shall
she go out free without money.
He that smiteth a man so that he die shall be surely put to death. And if a man lie not
in wait, but God deliver him into his hand, then I will appoint thee a place whither he
shall flee. But if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbor to slay him with guile,
thou shalt take him from mine altar that he may die. And he that smiteth his father or
his mother shall be surely put to death. And he that stealeth a man and selleth him,
or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death. And he that curseth his father
or his mother shall surely be put to death. And if men strive together and one smite another
with a stone or with his fist, and he die not but keepeth his bed, if he rise again
and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall he that smote him be quit, only he shall pay
for the loss of his time and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed. And if a man smite
his servant or his maid with a rod, and he die under his hand, he shall be surely punished.
Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, he shall not be punished, for he is his money.
If men strive and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart from her, and yet
no mischief follow, he shall be surely punished according as the woman's husband will lay
upon him, and he shall pay as the judges determine. And if any mischief follow, then thou shalt
give life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burning
wound for wound, stripe for stripe. And if a man smite the eye of his servant or the
eye of his maid that it perish, he shall let him go free for his eyes' sake. And if he
smite out his manservant's tooth or his maid's servant's tooth, he shall let him go free
for his tooth's sake. If an ox gore a man or a woman that they die, then the ox shall
be surely stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten, but the owner of the ox shall be
quit. But if the ox were wont to push with his horn in time past, and it hath been testified
to his owner, and he hath not kept him in, but that he hath killed a man or a woman,
the ox shall be stoned, and his owner also shall be put to death. If there be laid on
him a sum of money, then he shall give for the ransom of his life whatsoever as laid
upon him. Whether he have gored a son or have gored a daughter, according to this judgment
shall it be done unto him. If the ox shall push a manservant or a maidservant, he shall
give unto their master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall be stoned. And if
a man shall open a pit, or if a man shall dig a pit and not cover it, and an ox or an
ass fall therein, the owner of the pit shall make it good and give money unto the owner
of them, and the dead beast shall be his. And if one man's ox hurt another's that he
die, then they shall sell the live ox and divide the money of it, and the dead ox also
they shall divide. Or if it be known that the ox hath used to push in time past, and
his owner hath not kept him in, he shall surely pay ox for ox, and the dead shall be his
own.
CHAPTER XXII.
If a man shall steal an ox or a sheep, and kill it or sell it, he shall restore five
oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep. If a thief be found breaking up, and be smitten
that he die, there shall no blood be shed for him. If the sun be risen upon him, there
shall be blood shed for him, for he should make full restitution. If he have nothing,
then he shall be sold for his theft. If the theft be certainly found in his hand alive,
whether it be ox or ass or sheep, he shall restore double. If a man shall cause a field
or vineyard to be eaten, and shall put in his beast, and shall feed in another man's
field, of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own vineyard, shall he make
restitution.
If fire break out and catch in thorns, so that the stacks of corn or the standing corn
or the field be consumed therewith, he that kindled the fire shall surely make restitution.
If a man shall deliver unto his neighbour money or stuff to keep, and it be stolen out
of the man's house, if the thief be found let him pay double. If the thief be not found,
then the master of the house shall be brought unto the judges, to see whether he have put
his hand unto his neighbour's goods. For all manner of trespass, whether it be for
ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, or for any manner of lost thing, which another challenges
to be his, the cause of both parties shall come before the judges, and whom the judges
shall condemn, he shall pay double unto his neighbour. If a man deliver unto his neighbour
an ass or an ox or a sheep or any beast to keep, and it die or be hurt or driven away,
no man seeing it, then shall an oath of the Lord be between them both, that he hath not
put his hand unto his neighbour's goods, and the owner of it shall accept thereof, and
he shall not make it good. And if it be stolen from him, he shall make restitution unto the
owner thereof. If it be torn in pieces, then let him bring it for witness, and he shall
not make good that which was torn. And if a man borrow ought of his neighbour, and it
be hurt or die, the owner thereof, being not with it, he shall surely make it good. But
if the owner thereof be with it, he shall not make it good. If it be an hired thing,
it came for his hire. And if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with
her, he shall surely endow her to be his wife. If her father utterly refused to give her
unto him, he shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins.
Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live. Whosoever lieth with a beast shall surely be put to
death. He that sacrificeth unto any god save unto the Lord only, he shall be utterly destroyed.
Thou shalt neither vex a stranger nor oppress him, for ye were strangers in the land of
Egypt. He shall not afflict any widow or fatherless child. If thou afflict them in any wise, and
they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry, and my wrath shall wax hot, and
I will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows and your children fatherless.
If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, thou shalt not be to him
as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him usury. If thou at all take thy neighbor's
raiment to pledge, thou shalt deliver it unto him by that the sun goeth down, for that is
his covering only, it is his raiment for his skin, wherein shall he sleep, and it shall
come to pass when he crieth unto me that I will hear, for I am gracious.
Thou shalt not revile the gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people. Thou shalt not delay
to offer the first of thy ripe fruits and of thy liquors, the first born of thy sons
shalt thou give unto me. Likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen and with thy sheep, seven
days it shall be with his dam, on the eighth day thou shalt give it me. And ye shall be
holy men unto me, neither shall ye eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field,
ye shall cast it to the dogs.